ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter old Polonius with his man Reynaldo.]


POLONIUS
Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

REYNALDO  I will, my lord.

POLONIUS
You shall do marvelous wisely, good Reynaldo,
Before you visit him, to make inquire
Of his behavior.

REYNALDO  My lord, I did intend it.

POLONIUS
Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who, what means, and where they
keep,
What company, at what expense; and finding
By this encompassment and drift of question
That they do know my son, come you more nearer
Than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
As thus: "I know his father and his friends
And, in part, him." Do you mark this, Reynaldo?

REYNALDO  Ay, very well, my lord.

POLONIUS
"And, in part, him, but," you may say, "not well.
But if 't be he I mean, he's very wild,
Addicted so and so." And there put on him
What forgeries you please--marry, none so rank
As may dishonor him, take heed of that,
But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
As are companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.

REYNALDO  As gaming, my lord.

POLONIUS  Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarreling, drabbing--you may go so far.

REYNALDO  My lord, that would dishonor him.

POLONIUS
Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him
That he is open to incontinency;
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so
quaintly
That they may seem the taints of liberty,
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
Of general assault.

REYNALDO  But, my good lord--

POLONIUS  Wherefore should you do this?

REYNALDO  Ay, my lord, I would know that.

POLONIUS  Marry, sir, here's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of wit.
You, laying these slight sullies on my son,
As 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working,
Mark you, your party in converse, him you would
sound,
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
"Good sir," or so, or "friend," or "gentleman,"
According to the phrase or the addition
Of man and country--

REYNALDO  Very good, my lord.

POLONIUS  And then, sir, does he this, he does--what
was I about to say? By the Mass, I was about to say
something. Where did I leave?

REYNALDO  At "closes in the consequence," at "friend,
or so," and "gentleman."

POLONIUS
At "closes in the consequence"--ay, marry--
He closes thus: "I know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday," or "th' other day"
(Or then, or then, with such or such), "and as you
say,
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse,
There falling out at tennis"; or perchance
"I saw him enter such a house of sale"--
Videlicet, a brothel--or so forth. See you now
Your bait of falsehood take this carp of truth;
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
With windlasses and with assays of bias,
By indirections find directions out.
So by my former lecture and advice
Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

REYNALDO
My lord, I have.

POLONIUS  God be wi' you. Fare you well.

REYNALDO  Good my lord.

POLONIUS
Observe his inclination in yourself.

REYNALDO  I shall, my lord.

POLONIUS  And let him ply his music.

REYNALDO  Well, my lord.

POLONIUS
Farewell.	[Reynaldo exits.]

[Enter Ophelia.]

How now, Ophelia, what's the matter?

OPHELIA
O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

POLONIUS  With what, i' th' name of God?

OPHELIA
My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Ungartered, and down-gyved to his ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors--he comes before me.

POLONIUS
Mad for thy love?

OPHELIA  My lord, I do not know,
But truly I do fear it.

POLONIUS  What said he?

OPHELIA
He took me by the wrist and held me hard.
Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He falls to such perusal of my face
As he would draw it. Long stayed he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And, with his head over his shoulder turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out o' doors he went without their helps
And to the last bended their light on me.

POLONIUS
Come, go with me. I will go seek the King.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Whose violent property fordoes itself
And leads the will to desperate undertakings
As oft as any passions under heaven
That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?

OPHELIA
No, my good lord, but as you did command
I did repel his letters and denied
His access to me.

POLONIUS  That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
I had not coted him. I feared he did but trifle
And meant to wrack thee. But beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.
This must be known, which, being kept close, might
move
More grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish. Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and
Guildenstern and Attendants.]


KING
Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,
Sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should be,
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
So much from th' understanding of himself
I cannot dream of. I entreat you both
That, being of so young days brought up with him
And sith so neighbored to his youth and havior,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
Some little time, so by your companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from occasion you may glean,
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
That, opened, lies within our remedy.

QUEEN
Good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am two men there is not living
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show us so much gentry and goodwill
As to expend your time with us awhile
For the supply and profit of our hope,
Your visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a king's remembrance.

ROSENCRANTZ  Both your Majesties
Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
Put your dread pleasures more into command
Than to entreaty.

GUILDENSTERN  But we both obey,
And here give up ourselves in the full bent
To lay our service freely at your feet,
To be commanded.

KING
Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

QUEEN
Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed son.--Go, some of you,
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

GUILDENSTERN
Heavens make our presence and our practices
Pleasant and helpful to him!

QUEEN  Ay, amen!
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit
with some Attendants.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
Are joyfully returned.

KING
Thou still hast been the father of good news.

POLONIUS
Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege
I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
Both to my God and to my gracious king,
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
As it hath used to do, that I have found
The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

KING
O, speak of that! That do I long to hear.

POLONIUS
Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

KING
Thyself do grace to them and bring them in.
[Polonius exits.]
He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
The head and source of all your son's distemper.

QUEEN
I doubt it is no other but the main--
His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.

KING
Well, we shall sift him.

[Enter Ambassadors Voltemand and Cornelius with
Polonius.]

Welcome, my good friends.
Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?

VOLTEMAND
Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His nephew's levies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,
But, better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness. Whereat, grieved
That so his sickness, age, and impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
Makes vow before his uncle never more
To give th' assay of arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three-score thousand crowns in annual
fee
And his commission to employ those soldiers,
So levied as before, against the Polack,
With an entreaty, herein further shown,
[He gives a paper.]
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your dominions for this enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance
As therein are set down.

KING  It likes us well,
And, at our more considered time, we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime, we thank you for your well-took labor.
Go to your rest. At night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home!
[Voltemand and Cornelius exit.]

POLONIUS  This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
What majesty should be, what duty is,
Why day is day, night night, and time is time
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
"Mad" call I it, for, to define true madness,
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.

QUEEN  More matter with less art.

POLONIUS
Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
That he's mad, 'tis true; 'tis true 'tis pity,
And pity 'tis 'tis true--a foolish figure,
But farewell it, for I will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then, and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or, rather say, the cause of this defect,
For this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine)
Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
Hath given me this. Now gather and surmise.
[He reads.] To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the
most beautified Ophelia--
That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; "beautified" is a
vile phrase. But you shall hear. Thus: [He reads.]
In her excellent white bosom, these, etc.--

QUEEN  Came this from Hamlet to her?

POLONIUS
Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful.
[He reads the letter.]
	Doubt thou the stars are fire,
	   Doubt that the sun doth move,
	Doubt truth to be a liar,
	   But never doubt I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers. I have not
art to reckon my groans, but that I love thee best, O
most best, believe it. Adieu.
Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst
this machine is to him, Hamlet.
This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
And more above, hath his solicitings,
As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
All given to mine ear.

KING  But how hath she received his love?

POLONIUS  What do you think of me?

KING
As of a man faithful and honorable.

POLONIUS
I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
When I had seen this hot love on the wing
(As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
Before my daughter told me), what might you,
Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
If I had played the desk or table-book
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
"Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be." And then I prescripts gave her,
That she should lock herself from his resort,
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens;
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
And he, repelled (a short tale to make),
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
Into the madness wherein now he raves
And all we mourn for.

KING, [to Queen]  Do you think 'tis this?

QUEEN  It may be, very like.

POLONIUS
Hath there been such a time (I would fain know
that)
That I have positively said "'Tis so,"
When it proved otherwise?

KING  Not that I know.

POLONIUS
Take this from this, if this be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid, indeed,
Within the center.

KING  How may we try it further?

POLONIUS
You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Here in the lobby.

QUEEN  So he does indeed.

POLONIUS
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him.
[To the King.] Be you and I behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
Let me be no assistant for a state,
But keep a farm and carters.

KING  We will try it.

[Enter Hamlet reading on a book.]


QUEEN
But look where sadly the poor wretch comes
reading.

POLONIUS
Away, I do beseech you both, away.
I'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
[King and Queen exit with Attendants.]
How does my good Lord Hamlet?

HAMLET  Well, God-a-mercy.

POLONIUS  Do you know me, my lord?

HAMLET  Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.

POLONIUS  Not I, my lord.

HAMLET  Then I would you were so honest a man.

POLONIUS  Honest, my lord?

HAMLET  Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to
be one man picked out of ten thousand.

POLONIUS  That's very true, my lord.

HAMLET  For if the sun breed maggots in a dead
dog, being a good kissing carrion--Have you a
daughter?

POLONIUS  I have, my lord.

HAMLET  Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a
blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive,
friend, look to 't.

POLONIUS, [aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on
my daughter. Yet he knew me not at first; he said I
was a fishmonger. He is far gone. And truly, in my
youth, I suffered much extremity for love, very near
this. I'll speak to him again.--What do you read, my
lord?

HAMLET  Words, words, words.

POLONIUS  What is the matter, my lord?

HAMLET  Between who?

POLONIUS  I mean the matter that you read, my lord.

HAMLET  Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here
that old men have gray beards, that their faces are
wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of
wit, together with most weak hams; all which, sir,
though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I
hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for
yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if, like a crab,
you could go backward.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is
method in 't.--Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

HAMLET  Into my grave?

POLONIUS  Indeed, that's out of the air. [Aside.] How
pregnant sometimes his replies are! A happiness
that often madness hits on, which reason and
sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of
meeting between him and my daughter.--My lord,
I will take my leave of you.

HAMLET  You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I
will more willingly part withal--except my life,
except my life, except my life.

POLONIUS  Fare you well, my lord.

HAMLET, [aside]  These tedious old fools.

[Enter Guildenstern and Rosencrantz.]


POLONIUS  You go to seek the Lord Hamlet. There he is.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Polonius]  God save you, sir.
[Polonius exits.]

GUILDENSTERN  My honored lord.

ROSENCRANTZ  My most dear lord.

HAMLET  My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do
you both?

ROSENCRANTZ
As the indifferent children of the earth.

GUILDENSTERN
Happy in that we are not overhappy.
On Fortune's cap, we are not the very button.

HAMLET  Nor the soles of her shoe?

ROSENCRANTZ  Neither, my lord.

HAMLET  Then you live about her waist, or in the
middle of her favors?

GUILDENSTERN  Faith, her privates we.

HAMLET  In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true!
She is a strumpet. What news?

ROSENCRANTZ  None, my lord, but that the world's
grown honest.

HAMLET  Then is doomsday near. But your news is not
true. Let me question more in particular. What
have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of
Fortune that she sends you to prison hither?

GUILDENSTERN  Prison, my lord?

HAMLET  Denmark's a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Then is the world one.

HAMLET  A goodly one, in which there are many confines,
wards, and dungeons, Denmark being one o'
th' worst.

ROSENCRANTZ  We think not so, my lord.

HAMLET  Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it
so. To me, it is a prison.

ROSENCRANTZ  Why, then, your ambition makes it one.
'Tis too narrow for your mind.

HAMLET  O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell and
count myself a king of infinite space, were it not
that I have bad dreams.

GUILDENSTERN  Which dreams, indeed, are ambition,
for the very substance of the ambitious is merely
the shadow of a dream.

HAMLET  A dream itself is but a shadow.

ROSENCRANTZ  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy
and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

HAMLET  Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs
and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.
Shall we to th' court? For, by my fay, I cannot
reason.

ROSENCRANTZ/GUILDENSTERN  We'll wait upon you.

HAMLET  No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an
honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. But,
in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at
Elsinore?

ROSENCRANTZ  To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

HAMLET  Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks;
but I thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks
are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for?
Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation?
Come, come, deal justly with me. Come, come; nay,
speak.

GUILDENSTERN  What should we say, my lord?

HAMLET  Anything but to th' purpose. You were sent
for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks
which your modesties have not craft enough to
color. I know the good king and queen have sent for
you.

ROSENCRANTZ  To what end, my lord?

HAMLET  That you must teach me. But let me conjure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy
of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
love, and by what more dear a better
proposer can charge you withal: be even and direct
with me whether you were sent for or no.

ROSENCRANTZ, [to Guildenstern]  What say you?

HAMLET, [aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If
you love me, hold not off.

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, we were sent for.

HAMLET  I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the
King and Queen molt no feather. I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging
firmament, this majestical roof, fretted
with golden fire--why, it appeareth nothing to me
but a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors.
What a piece of work is a man, how noble in
reason, how infinite in faculties, in form and moving
how express and admirable; in action how like
an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals--and
yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
delights not me, no, nor women neither, though by
your smiling you seem to say so.

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
thoughts.

HAMLET  Why did you laugh, then, when I said "man
delights not me"?

ROSENCRANTZ  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
hither are they coming to offer you service.

HAMLET  He that plays the king shall be welcome--his
Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh
whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady
shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall
halt for 't. What players are they?

ROSENCRANTZ  Even those you were wont to take such
delight in, the tragedians of the city.

HAMLET  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

ROSENCRANTZ  I think their inhibition comes by the
means of the late innovation.

HAMLET  Do they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the city? Are they so followed?

ROSENCRANTZ  No, indeed are they not.

HAMLET  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?

ROSENCRANTZ  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
most tyrannically clapped for 't. These are now the
fashion and so berattle the common stages (so
they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.

HAMLET  What, are they children? Who maintains 'em?
How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
players (as it is most like, if their means are
no better), their writers do them wrong to make
them exclaim against their own succession?

ROSENCRANTZ  Faith, there has been much to-do on
both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
them to controversy. There was for a while no
money bid for argument unless the poet and the
player went to cuffs in the question.

HAMLET  Is 't possible?

GUILDENSTERN  O, there has been much throwing
about of brains.

HAMLET  Do the boys carry it away?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, that they do, my lord--Hercules
and his load too.

HAMLET  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
if philosophy could find it out.
[A flourish for the Players.]

GUILDENSTERN  There are the players.

HAMLET  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
Your hands, come then. Th' appurtenance of welcome
is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players,
which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
deceived.

GUILDENSTERN  In what, my dear lord?

HAMLET  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS  Well be with you, gentlemen.

HAMLET  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too--at
each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
not yet out of his swaddling clouts.

ROSENCRANTZ  Haply he is the second time come to
them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

HAMLET  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
players; mark it.--You say right, sir, a Monday
morning, 'twas then indeed.

POLONIUS  My lord, I have news to tell you.

HAMLET  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
was an actor in Rome--

POLONIUS  The actors are come hither, my lord.

HAMLET  Buzz, buzz.

POLONIUS  Upon my honor--

HAMLET  Then came each actor on his ass.

POLONIUS  The best actors in the world, either for
tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,
tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
these are the only men.

HAMLET  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
hadst thou!

POLONIUS  What a treasure had he, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	One fair daughter, and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.

POLONIUS, [aside]  Still on my daughter.

HAMLET  Am I not i' th' right, old Jephthah?

POLONIUS  If you call me "Jephthah," my lord: I have a
daughter that I love passing well.

HAMLET  Nay, that follows not.

POLONIUS  What follows then, my lord?

HAMLET  Why,
	As by lot, God wot
and then, you know,
	It came to pass, as most like it was--
the first row of the pious chanson will show you
more, for look where my abridgment comes.

[Enter the Players.]

You are welcome, masters; welcome all.--I am glad
to see thee well.--Welcome, good friends.--O my
old friend! Why, thy face is valanced since I saw thee
last. Com'st thou to beard me in Denmark?--What,
my young lady and mistress! By 'r Lady, your Ladyship
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by
the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a
piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to 't
like French falconers, fly at anything we see. We'll
have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of your
quality. Come, a passionate speech.

FIRST_PLAYER  What speech, my good lord?

HAMLET  I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it
was never acted, or, if it was, not above once; for
the play, I remember, pleased not the million:
'twas caviary to the general. But it was (as I
received it, and others whose judgments in such
matters cried in the top of mine) an excellent play,
well digested in the scenes, set down with as much
modesty as cunning. I remember one said there
were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
savory, nor no matter in the phrase that might indict
the author of affection, but called it an honest
method, as wholesome as sweet and, by very much,
more handsome than fine. One speech in 't I
chiefly loved. 'Twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and
thereabout of it especially when he speaks of
Priam's slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at
this line--let me see, let me see:
The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast--
'tis not so; it begins with Pyrrhus:
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in th' ominous horse,
Hath now this dread and black complexion smeared
With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot,
Now is he total gules, horridly tricked
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous and a damned light
To their lord's murder. Roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old grandsire Priam seeks.
So, proceed you.

POLONIUS  'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good
accent and good discretion.

FIRST_PLAYER  Anon he finds him
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,
Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Repugnant to command. Unequal matched,
Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
Th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear. For lo, his sword,
Which was declining on the milky head
Of reverend Priam, seemed i' th' air to stick.
So as a painted tyrant Pyrrhus stood
And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
Did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm
A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the orb below
As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
On Mars's armor, forged for proof eterne,
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods
In general synod take away her power,
Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
As low as to the fiends!

POLONIUS  This is too long.

HAMLET  It shall to the barber's with your beard.--
Prithee say on. He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or
he sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.

FIRST_PLAYER
But who, ah woe, had seen the mobled queen--

HAMLET  "The mobled queen"?

POLONIUS  That's good. "Mobled queen" is good.

FIRST_PLAYER
Run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head
Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
About her lank and all o'erteemed loins
A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up--
Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped,
'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
pronounced.
But if the gods themselves did see her then
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
The instant burst of clamor that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
And passion in the gods.

POLONIUS  Look whe'er he has not turned his color and
has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more.

HAMLET  'Tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of
this soon.--Good my lord, will you see the players
well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used,
for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
time. After your death you were better have a bad
epitaph than their ill report while you live.

POLONIUS  My lord, I will use them according to their
desert.

HAMLET  God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every
man after his desert and who shall 'scape
whipping? Use them after your own honor and
dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.

POLONIUS  Come, sirs.

HAMLET  Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play
tomorrow. [As Polonius and Players exit, Hamlet speaks to
the First Player.] Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can
you play "The Murder of Gonzago"?

FIRST_PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  We'll ha 't tomorrow night. You could, for a
need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen
lines, which I would set down and insert in 't,
could you not?

FIRST_PLAYER  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Very well. Follow that lord--and look you
mock him not. [First Player exits.] My good friends,
I'll leave you till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord.

HAMLET
Ay, so, good-bye to you.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]
Now I am alone.
O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceit--and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he do
Had he the motive and the cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
Make mad the guilty and appall the free,
Confound the ignorant and amaze indeed
The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing--no, not for a king
Upon whose property and most dear life
A damned defeat was made. Am I a coward?
Who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat
As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?
Ha! 'Swounds, I should take it! For it cannot be
But I am pigeon-livered and lack gall
To make oppression bitter, or ere this
I should have fatted all the region kites
With this slave's offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless
villain!
O vengeance!
Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
That I, the son of a dear father murdered,
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words
And fall a-cursing like a very drab,
A stallion! Fie upon 't! Foh!
About, my brains!--Hum, I have heard
That guilty creatures sitting at a play
Have, by the very cunning of the scene,
Been struck so to the soul that presently
They have proclaimed their malefactions;
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
Play something like the murder of my father
Before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
I'll tent him to the quick. If he do blench,
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
May be a devil, and the devil hath power
T' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps,
Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
As he is very potent with such spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
More relative than this. The play's the thing
Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the King.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
Guildenstern, and Lords.]


KING
And can you by no drift of conference
Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

ROSENCRANTZ
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.

GUILDENSTERN
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty madness keeps aloof
When we would bring him on to some confession
Of his true state.

QUEEN  Did he receive you well?

ROSENCRANTZ  Most like a gentleman.

GUILDENSTERN
But with much forcing of his disposition.

ROSENCRANTZ
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.

QUEEN  Did you assay him to any pastime?

ROSENCRANTZ
Madam, it so fell out that certain players
We o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it. They are here about the court,
And, as I think, they have already order
This night to play before him.

POLONIUS  'Tis most true,
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear and see the matter.

KING
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
And drive his purpose into these delights.

ROSENCRANTZ
We shall, my lord.	[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern
and Lords exit.]

KING  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Affront Ophelia.
Her father and myself, lawful espials,
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
We may of their encounter frankly judge
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If 't be th' affliction of his love or no
That thus he suffers for.

QUEEN  I shall obey you.
And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
That your good beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlet's wildness. So shall I hope your virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your honors.

OPHELIA  Madam, I wish it may.
[Queen exits.]

POLONIUS
Ophelia, walk you here.--Gracious, so please you,
We will bestow ourselves. [To Ophelia.] Read on this
book,
That show of such an exercise may color
Your loneliness.--We are oft to blame in this
('Tis too much proved), that with devotion's visage
And pious action we do sugar o'er
The devil himself.

KING, [aside]  O, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my
conscience.
The harlot's cheek beautied with plast'ring art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
Than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burden!

POLONIUS
I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
[They withdraw.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
To be or not to be--that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And, by opposing, end them. To die, to sleep--
No more--and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to--'tis a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep--
To sleep, perchance to dream. Ay, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns, puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pitch and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry
And lose the name of action.--Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.--Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.

OPHELIA  Good my lord,
How does your Honor for this many a day?

HAMLET  I humbly thank you, well.

OPHELIA
My lord, I have remembrances of yours
That I have longed long to redeliver.
I pray you now receive them.

HAMLET
No, not I. I never gave you aught.

OPHELIA
My honored lord, you know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed
As made the things more rich. Their perfume
lost,
Take these again, for to the noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.

HAMLET  Ha, ha, are you honest?

OPHELIA  My lord?

HAMLET  Are you fair?

OPHELIA  What means your Lordship?

HAMLET  That if you be honest and fair, your honesty
should admit no discourse to your beauty.

OPHELIA  Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce
than with honesty?

HAMLET  Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than
the force of honesty can translate beauty into his
likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now
the time gives it proof. I did love you once.

OPHELIA  Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

HAMLET  You should not have believed me, for virtue
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall
relish of it. I loved you not.

OPHELIA  I was the more deceived.

HAMLET  Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be
a breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,
but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
were better my mother had not borne me: I am
very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses
at my beck than I have thoughts to put them
in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act
them in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves
all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
Where's your father?

OPHELIA  At home, my lord.

HAMLET  Let the doors be shut upon him that he may
play the fool nowhere but in 's own house. Farewell.

OPHELIA  O, help him, you sweet heavens!

HAMLET  If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague
for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
nunnery, farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry,
marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go, and
quickly too. Farewell.

OPHELIA  Heavenly powers, restore him!

HAMLET  I have heard of your paintings too, well
enough. God hath given you one face, and you
make yourselves another. You jig and amble, and
you lisp; you nickname God's creatures and make
your wantonness your ignorance. Go to, I'll no
more on 't. It hath made me mad. I say we will have
no more marriage. Those that are married already,
all but one, shall live. The rest shall keep as they are.
To a nunnery, go.	[He exits.]

OPHELIA
O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue,
sword,
Th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
The glass of fashion and the mold of form,
Th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the honey of his musicked vows,
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
Like sweet bells jangled, out of time and harsh;
That unmatched form and stature of blown youth
Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
T' have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

KING, [advancing with Polonius]
Love? His affections do not that way tend;
Nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little,
Was not like madness. There's something in his soul
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
Will be some danger; which for to prevent,
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
With variable objects, shall expel
This something-settled matter in his heart,
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?

POLONIUS
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The origin and commencement of his grief
Sprung from neglected love.--How now, Ophelia?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
We heard it all.--My lord, do as you please,
But, if you hold it fit, after the play
Let his queen-mother all alone entreat him
To show his grief. Let her be round with him;
And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
Of all their conference. If she find him not,
To England send him, or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.

KING  It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Hamlet and three of the Players.]


HAMLET  Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced
it to you, trippingly on the tongue; but if you mouth
it, as many of our players do, I had as lief the
town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and
beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. O,
it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious,
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very
rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the
most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable
dumb shows and noise. I would have such a fellow
whipped for o'erdoing Termagant. It out-Herods
Herod. Pray you, avoid it.

PLAYER  I warrant your Honor.

HAMLET  Be not too tame neither, but let your own
discretion be your tutor. Suit the action to the
word, the word to the action, with this special
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature. For anything so o'erdone is from the purpose
of playing, whose end, both at the first and
now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her
own image, and the very age and body of the time
his form and pressure. Now this overdone or come
tardy off, though it makes the unskillful laugh,
cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure
of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh
a whole theater of others. O, there be players that I
have seen play and heard others praise (and that
highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither
having th' accent of Christians nor the gait of
Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and
bellowed that I have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them
well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

PLAYER  I hope we have reformed that indifferently
with us, sir.

HAMLET  O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
your clowns speak no more than is set down for
them, for there be of them that will themselves
laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators
to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered.
That's villainous and shows a most pitiful ambition
in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
[Players exit.]

[Enter Polonius, Guildenstern, and Rosencrantz.]

How now, my lord, will the King hear this piece of
work?

POLONIUS  And the Queen too, and that presently.

HAMLET  Bid the players make haste.	[Polonius exits.]
Will you two help to hasten them?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord.	[They exit.]

HAMLET  What ho, Horatio!

[Enter Horatio.]


HORATIO  Here, sweet lord, at your service.

HAMLET
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
As e'er my conversation coped withal.

HORATIO
O, my dear lord--

HAMLET  Nay, do not think I flatter,
For what advancement may I hope from thee
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits
To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be
flattered?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for herself. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all that suffers nothing,
A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards
Hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blessed are those
Whose blood and judgment are so well
commeddled
That they are not a pipe for Fortune's finger
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
There is a play tonight before the King.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance
Which I have told thee of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
Even with the very comment of thy soul
Observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
And my imaginations are as foul
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
And, after, we will both our judgments join
In censure of his seeming.

HORATIO  Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.
[Sound a flourish.]

HAMLET  They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.

[Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drums. Enter King, Queen,
Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and other
Lords attendant with the King's guard carrying
torches.]


KING  How fares our cousin Hamlet?

HAMLET  Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. I
eat the air, promise-crammed. You cannot feed
capons so.

KING  I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet. These
words are not mine.

HAMLET  No, nor mine now. [To Polonius.] My lord, you
played once i' th' university, you say?

POLONIUS  That did I, my lord, and was accounted a
good actor.

HAMLET  What did you enact?

POLONIUS  I did enact Julius Caesar. I was killed i' th'
Capitol. Brutus killed me.

HAMLET  It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
calf there.--Be the players ready?

ROSENCRANTZ  Ay, my lord. They stay upon your
patience.

QUEEN  Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

HAMLET  No, good mother. Here's metal more
attractive.	[Hamlet takes a place near Ophelia.]

POLONIUS, [to the King]  Oh, ho! Do you mark that?

HAMLET  Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

OPHELIA  No, my lord.

HAMLET  I mean, my head upon your lap?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  Do you think I meant country matters?

OPHELIA  I think nothing, my lord.

HAMLET  That's a fair thought to lie between maids'
legs.

OPHELIA  What is, my lord?

HAMLET  Nothing.

OPHELIA  You are merry, my lord.

HAMLET  Who, I?

OPHELIA  Ay, my lord.

HAMLET  O God, your only jig-maker. What should a
man do but be merry? For look you how cheerfully
my mother looks, and my father died within 's two
hours.

OPHELIA  Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

HAMLET  So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black,
for I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens, die two
months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
a year. But, by 'r Lady, he must build churches, then,
or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the
hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "For oh, for oh, the
hobby-horse is forgot."
[The trumpets sounds. Dumb show follows.]

[Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly, the Queen
embracing him and he her. She kneels and makes show of
protestation unto him. He takes her up and declines his
head upon her neck. He lies him down upon a bank of
flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon
comes in another man, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours
poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. The Queen
returns, finds the King dead, makes passionate action. The
poisoner with some three or four come in again, seem to
condole with her. The dead body is carried away. The
poisoner woos the Queen with gifts. She seems harsh
awhile but in the end accepts his love.]
[Players exit.]

OPHELIA  What means this, my lord?

HAMLET  Marry, this is miching mallecho. It means
mischief.

OPHELIA  Belike this show imports the argument of the
play.

[Enter Prologue.]


HAMLET  We shall know by this fellow. The players
cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.

OPHELIA  Will he tell us what this show meant?

HAMLET  Ay, or any show that you will show him. Be
not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you
what it means.

OPHELIA  You are naught, you are naught. I'll mark the
play.

PROLOGUE
	For us and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.	[He exits.]

HAMLET  Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?

OPHELIA  'Tis brief, my lord.

HAMLET  As woman's love.

[Enter the Player King and Queen.]


PLAYER_KING
Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen
About the world have times twelve thirties been
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

PLAYER_QUEEN
So many journeys may the sun and moon
Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
So far from cheer and from your former state,
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must.
For women fear too much, even as they love,
And women's fear and love hold quantity,
In neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And, as my love is sized, my fear is so:
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

PLAYER_KING
Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too.
My operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shall live in this fair world behind,
Honored, beloved; and haply one as kind
For husband shalt thou--

PLAYER_QUEEN  O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
In second husband let me be accurst.
None wed the second but who killed the first.

HAMLET  That's wormwood!

PLAYER_QUEEN
The instances that second marriage move
Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time I kill my husband dead
When second husband kisses me in bed.

PLAYER_KING
I do believe you think what now you speak,
But what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Of violent birth, but poor validity,
Which now, the fruit unripe, sticks on the tree
But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
Their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favorite flies;
The poor, advanced, makes friends of enemies.
And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
And who in want a hollow friend doth try
Directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where I begun:
Our wills and fates do so contrary run
That our devices still are overthrown;
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed,
But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

PLAYER_QUEEN
Nor Earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Sport and repose lock from me day and night,
To desperation turn my trust and hope,
An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope.
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
Meet what I would have well and it destroy.
Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
If, once a widow, ever I be wife.

HAMLET  If she should break it now!

PLAYER_KING
'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.	[Sleeps.]

PLAYER_QUEEN  Sleep rock thy brain,
And never come mischance between us twain.
[Player Queen exits.]

HAMLET  Madam, how like you this play?

QUEEN  The lady doth protest too much, methinks.

HAMLET  O, but she'll keep her word.

KING  Have you heard the argument? Is there no
offense in 't?

HAMLET  No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest. No
offense i' th' world.

KING  What do you call the play?

HAMLET  "The Mousetrap." Marry, how? Tropically.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna.
Gonzago is the duke's name, his wife Baptista. You
shall see anon. 'Tis a knavish piece of work, but
what of that? Your Majesty and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the galled jade wince;
our withers are unwrung.

[Enter Lucianus.]

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

OPHELIA  You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

HAMLET  I could interpret between you and your love,
if I could see the puppets dallying.

OPHELIA  You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

HAMLET  It would cost you a groaning to take off mine
edge.

OPHELIA  Still better and worse.

HAMLET  So you mis-take your husbands.--Begin,
murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable faces and
begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for
revenge.

LUCIANUS
Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time
agreeing,
Confederate season, else no creature seeing,
Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural magic and dire property
On wholesome life usurp immediately.
[Pours the poison in his ears.]

HAMLET  He poisons him i' th' garden for his estate. His
name's Gonzago. The story is extant and written in
very choice Italian. You shall see anon how the
murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
[Claudius rises.]

OPHELIA  The King rises.

HAMLET  What, frighted with false fire?

QUEEN  How fares my lord?

POLONIUS  Give o'er the play.

KING  Give me some light. Away!

POLONIUS  Lights, lights, lights!
[All but Hamlet and Horatio exit.]

HAMLET
	Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
	   The hart ungalled play.
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	   Thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers (if the
rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me) with two
Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
fellowship in a cry of players?

HORATIO  Half a share.

HAMLET  A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	   This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself, and now reigns here
	   A very very--pajock.

HORATIO  You might have rhymed.

HAMLET  O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for
a thousand pound. Didst perceive?

HORATIO  Very well, my lord.

HAMLET  Upon the talk of the poisoning?

HORATIO  I did very well note him.

HAMLET  Ah ha! Come, some music! Come, the
recorders!
	For if the King like not the comedy,
	Why, then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!

[Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.]


GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word
with you.

HAMLET  Sir, a whole history.

GUILDENSTERN  The King, sir--

HAMLET  Ay, sir, what of him?

GUILDENSTERN  Is in his retirement marvelous
distempered.

HAMLET  With drink, sir?

GUILDENSTERN  No, my lord, with choler.

HAMLET  Your wisdom should show itself more richer
to signify this to the doctor, for for me to put him to
his purgation would perhaps plunge him into more
choler.

GUILDENSTERN  Good my lord, put your discourse into
some frame and start not so wildly from my
affair.

HAMLET  I am tame, sir. Pronounce.

GUILDENSTERN  The Queen your mother, in most great
affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

HAMLET  You are welcome.

GUILDENSTERN  Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not
of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me
a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
commandment. If not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.

HAMLET  Sir, I cannot.

ROSENCRANTZ  What, my lord?

HAMLET  Make you a wholesome answer. My wit's
diseased. But, sir, such answer as I can make, you
shall command--or, rather, as you say, my mother.
Therefore no more but to the matter. My mother,
you say--

ROSENCRANTZ  Then thus she says: your behavior hath
struck her into amazement and admiration.

HAMLET  O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother!
But is there no sequel at the heels of this
mother's admiration? Impart.

ROSENCRANTZ  She desires to speak with you in her
closet ere you go to bed.

HAMLET  We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
Have you any further trade with us?

ROSENCRANTZ  My lord, you once did love me.

HAMLET  And do still, by these pickers and stealers.

ROSENCRANTZ  Good my lord, what is your cause of
distemper? You do surely bar the door upon your
own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.

HAMLET  Sir, I lack advancement.

ROSENCRANTZ  How can that be, when you have the
voice of the King himself for your succession in
Denmark?

HAMLET  Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows"--the
proverb is something musty.

[Enter the Players with recorders.]

O, the recorders! Let me see one. [He takes a
recorder and turns to Guildenstern.] To withdraw
with you: why do you go about to recover the wind
of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?

GUILDENSTERN  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my
love is too unmannerly.

HAMLET  I do not well understand that. Will you play
upon this pipe?

GUILDENSTERN  My lord, I cannot.

HAMLET  I pray you.

GUILDENSTERN  Believe me, I cannot.

HAMLET  I do beseech you.

GUILDENSTERN  I know no touch of it, my lord.

HAMLET  It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages
with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent
music. Look you, these are the stops.

GUILDENSTERN  But these cannot I command to any
utt'rance of harmony. I have not the skill.

HAMLET  Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing
you make of me! You would play upon me, you
would seem to know my stops, you would pluck
out the heart of my mystery, you would sound me
from my lowest note to the top of my compass;
and there is much music, excellent voice, in this
little organ, yet cannot you make it speak. 'Sblood,
do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
Call me what instrument you will, though you can
fret me, you cannot play upon me.

[Enter Polonius.]

God bless you, sir.

POLONIUS  My lord, the Queen would speak with you,
and presently.

HAMLET  Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in
shape of a camel?

POLONIUS  By th' Mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.

HAMLET  Methinks it is like a weasel.

POLONIUS  It is backed like a weasel.

HAMLET  Or like a whale.

POLONIUS  Very like a whale.

HAMLET  Then I will come to my mother by and by.
[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent.--I will
come by and by.

POLONIUS  I will say so.

HAMLET  "By and by" is easily said. Leave me,
friends.
[All but Hamlet exit.]
'Tis now the very witching time of night,
When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes
out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot
blood
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft, now to my mother.
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural.
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites:
How in my words somever she be shent,
To give them seals never, my soul, consent.
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.]


KING
I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you.
I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
Hazard so near 's as doth hourly grow
Out of his brows.

GUILDENSTERN  We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.

ROSENCRANTZ
The single and peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and armor of the mind
To keep itself from noyance, but much more
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
The lives of many. The cess of majesty
Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
What's near it with it; or it is a massy wheel
Fixed on the summit of the highest mount,
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined, which, when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence,
Attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

KING
Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,
For we will fetters put about this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.

ROSENCRANTZ  We will haste us.
[Rosencrantz and Guildenstern exit.]

[Enter Polonius.]


POLONIUS
My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras I'll convey myself
To hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him
home;
And, as you said (and wisely was it said),
'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
And tell you what I know.

KING  Thanks, dear my lord.
[Polonius exits.]
O, my offense is rank, it smells to heaven;
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't,
A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin
And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then I'll look up.
My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? "Forgive me my foul murder"?
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder:
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned and retain th' offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice,
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But 'tis not so above:
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
In his true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees, and heart with strings of steel
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe.
All may be well.	[He kneels.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET
Now might I do it pat, now he is a-praying,
And now I'll do 't.	[He draws his sword.]
And so he goes to heaven,
And so am I revenged. That would be scanned:
A villain kills my father, and for that,
I, his sole son, do this same villain send
To heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven.
But in our circumstance and course of thought
'Tis heavy with him. And am I then revenged
To take him in the purging of his soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
[He sheathes his sword.]
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At game, a-swearing, or about some act
That has no relish of salvation in 't--
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
And that his soul may be as damned and black
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
[Hamlet exits.]

KING, [rising]
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Queen and Polonius.]


POLONIUS
He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear
with
And that your Grace hath screened and stood
between
Much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you, be round with him.

HAMLET, [within]  Mother, mother, mother!

QUEEN  I'll warrant you. Fear me not. Withdraw,
I hear him coming.
[Polonius hides behind the arras.]

[Enter Hamlet.]


HAMLET  Now, mother, what's the matter?

QUEEN
Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

HAMLET
Mother, you have my father much offended.

QUEEN
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

HAMLET
Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

QUEEN
Why, how now, Hamlet?

HAMLET  What's the matter now?

QUEEN
Have you forgot me?

HAMLET  No, by the rood, not so.
You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
And (would it were not so) you are my mother.

QUEEN
Nay, then I'll set those to you that can speak.

HAMLET
Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge.
You go not till I set you up a glass
Where you may see the inmost part of you.

QUEEN
What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?
Help, ho!

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]  What ho! Help!

HAMLET
How now, a rat? Dead for a ducat, dead.
[He kills Polonius by thrusting a rapier
through the arras.]

POLONIUS, [behind the arras]
O, I am slain!

QUEEN  O me, what hast thou done?

HAMLET  Nay, I know not. Is it the King?

QUEEN
O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

HAMLET
A bloody deed--almost as bad, good mother,
As kill a king and marry with his brother.

QUEEN
As kill a king?

HAMLET  Ay, lady, it was my word.
[He pulls Polonius' body from behind the arras.]
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell.
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
[To Queen.] Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit
you down,
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff,
If damned custom have not brazed it so
That it be proof and bulwark against sense.

QUEEN
What have I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
In noise so rude against me?

HAMLET  Such an act
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love
And sets a blister there, makes marriage vows
As false as dicers' oaths--O, such a deed
As from the body of contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet religion makes
A rhapsody of words! Heaven's face does glow
O'er this solidity and compound mass
With heated visage, as against the doom,
Is thought-sick at the act.

QUEEN  Ay me, what act
That roars so loud and thunders in the index?

HAMLET
Look here upon this picture and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow,
Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars' to threaten and command,
A station like the herald Mercury
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,
A combination and a form indeed
Where every god did seem to set his seal
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed
And batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes?
You cannot call it love, for at your age
The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble
And waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Is apoplexed; for madness would not err,
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thralled,
But it reserved some quantity of choice
To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't
That thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
Or but a sickly part of one true sense
Could not so mope. O shame, where is thy blush?
Rebellious hell,
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
When the compulsive ardor gives the charge,
Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
And reason panders will.

QUEEN  O Hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st my eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and grained spots
As will not leave their tinct.

HAMLET  Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
Over the nasty sty!

QUEEN  O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in my ears.
No more, sweet Hamlet!

HAMLET  A murderer and a villain,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings,
A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
That from a shelf the precious diadem stole
And put it in his pocket--

QUEEN  No more!

HAMLET  A king of shreds and patches--

[Enter Ghost.]

Save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
You heavenly guards!--What would your gracious
figure?

QUEEN  Alas, he's mad.

HAMLET
Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
Th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!

GHOST  Do not forget. This visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, Hamlet.

HAMLET  How is it with you, lady?

QUEEN  Alas, how is 't with you,
That you do bend your eye on vacancy
And with th' incorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,
And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?

HAMLET
On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares.
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. [To the Ghost.] Do not
look upon me,
Lest with this piteous action you convert
My stern effects. Then what I have to do
Will want true color--tears perchance for blood.

QUEEN  To whom do you speak this?

HAMLET  Do you see nothing there?

QUEEN
Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

HAMLET  Nor did you nothing hear?

QUEEN  No, nothing but ourselves.

HAMLET
Why, look you there, look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he lived!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
[Ghost exits.]

QUEEN
This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
Is very cunning in.

HAMLET  Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
And makes as healthful music. It is not madness
That I have uttered. Bring me to the test,
And I the matter will reword, which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
Lay not that flattering unction to your soul
That not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the compost on the weeds
To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,
For, in the fatness of these pursy times,
Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

QUEEN
O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain!

HAMLET
O, throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half!
Good night. But go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good
He likewise gives a frock or livery
That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence, the next more easy;
For use almost can change the stamp of nature
And either ... the devil or throw him out
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,
And, when you are desirous to be blest,
I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord
[Pointing to Polonius.]
I do repent; but heaven hath pleased it so
To punish me with this and this with me,
That I must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him and will answer well
The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
I must be cruel only to be kind.
This bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.

QUEEN  What shall I do?

HAMLET
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,
Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,
And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses
Or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers,
Make you to ravel all this matter out
That I essentially am not in madness,
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
To try conclusions, in the basket creep
And break your own neck down.

QUEEN
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
What thou hast said to me.

HAMLET
I must to England, you know that.

QUEEN  Alack,
I had forgot! 'Tis so concluded on.

HAMLET
There's letters sealed; and my two schoolfellows,
Whom I will trust as I will adders fanged,
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer
Hoist with his own petard; and 't shall go hard
But I will delve one yard below their mines
And blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
When in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbor room.
Mother, good night indeed. This counselor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life a foolish prating knave.--
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.--
Good night, mother.
[They exit, Hamlet tugging in Polonius.]